Google Cloud documentation (#69)
thoth-tech/documentation: docs/OnTrack/Deployment/Google Cloud/Overview.md

- [Miro for Google Cloud - CI/CD](https://miro.com/app/board/uXjVO64xoQw=/?share_link_id=57734801709)
- [Pull Request - OnTrack deployment on GCP](https://github.com/thoth-tech/doubtfire-deploy-GCP/pull/5)

## Assets

- [Google Cloud - Doubtfire](https://github.com/thoth-tech/documentation/tree/main/docs/OnTrack/Deployment/Google%20Cloud/assets/GoogleCloud_Doubtfire.jpg)
- [Google Cloud - CI/CD](https://github.com/thoth-tech/documentation/tree/main/docs/OnTrack/Deployment/Google%20Cloud/assets/GoogleCloud_CICD.jpg)
- [doubtfire-localhost-compose](https://github.com/thoth-tech/documentation/tree/main/docs/OnTrack/Deployment/Google%20Cloud/assets/doubtfire-localhost-compose.png)
- [doubtfire-localhost-docker](https://github.com/thoth-tech/documentation/tree/main/docs/OnTrack/Deployment/Google%20Cloud/assets/doubtfire-localhost-docker.png)
- [doubtfire-localhost](https://github.com/thoth-tech/documentation/tree/main/docs/OnTrack/Deployment/Google%20Cloud/assets/doubtfire-localhost.png)
- [gcp-instance-docker](https://github.com/thoth-tech/documentation/tree/main/docs/OnTrack/Deployment/Google%20Cloud/assets/gcp-instance-docker.png "Instance running docker containers")

> - [ontrack-login](https://github.com/thoth-tech/documentation/tree/main/docs/OnTrack/Deployment/Google%20Cloud/assets/ontrack-login.png "OnTrack Login")

Reviewer: **suggestion:** These links are already placed throughout the document. I wonder if we can just drop this section as it creates unneeded maintainance costs. WDYT?

Author: Agreed. Sorted now.

# Google Cloud - Overview

[Overview](#overview)

[Aims](#aims)

[Initial stages](#initial-stages)

[Next stages](#next-stages)

[Links](#links)

[Assets](#assets)

## Overview

![Google Cloud - Doubtfire](https://github.com/thoth-tech/documentation/tree/main/docs/OnTrack/Deployment/Google%20Cloud/assets/GoogleCloud_Doubtfire.jpg "Google Cloud - Doubtfire")

> 

Reviewer 2: I think it would be good to address why this project exists in the overview - so Thoth Tech has their own deployment of Ontrack to develop rather than the Deakin deployment

Reviewer 2: Will help future teams understand and make decisions in regards to the project

Author: I've updated the Google Cloud overview to cover some background of the deployment team project objectives.

hosted on Google Cloud Platform (GCP).

Our GCP project is centrally managed by Deakin IT where the team have been granted access using our
Deakin Google Workspace accounts.

- GCP Project Name: sit-22t1-ontrack-deplo-d026375
- GCP Project ID: sit-22t1-ontrack-deplo-d026375

In Google Compute Engine, we have created server instance running Linux (Centos 7.x). The instance
is a small, initial footprint that has a publicly facing network and accessible over the internet
via HTTPS (port 443).

We have used the source code from the Thoth Tech repository for the deployment into GCP, where we
used **docker compose** to deploy the images for the components required to run Doubtfire (api
server, app server, doubtfire-web, mariadb, nginx).

## Aims

- Deploy a student-run version of OnTrack hosted on Google Cloud. This version will be running in
  isolation, independently of the Deakin University version.
- Create a CI/CD pipeline that automates the building, deployment, and validation of a of the Thoth
  Tech OnTrack to Google Cloud.

## Initial stages

Initially, the Google Cloud team had spent time understanding GCP, Docker, and the Doubtfire

> deployment. We ran several tests locally prior to deploying a server instance in GCP and deploying

Reviewer 2: Is there any documentation for the tests? How to run the test locally? or what tests have been run?

Author: I have expanded on the details and shared screenshots of each stage and how we went from testing locally (localhost on our workstations) to deploying into GCP.

## Overview

> The Google Cloud team's main deliverable for the project is to deploy a student-run version of
> OnTrack hosted on Google Cloud Platform (GCP) for the purpose of Thoth Tech having their own
> deployment to develop OnTrack that is separate to Deakin's deployment.

Reviewer: **suggestion:** This sentence is really long and a bit mouthful. Could we break it up? 🤔 

```suggestion
The Google Cloud team's main deliverable for the project is to deploy a student-run version of
OnTrack which is hosted on the Google Cloud Platform (GCP). The goal is for Thoth Tech to have their own
deployment to develop OnTrack that is separate to Deakin's deployment.
```

Author: Fixed in my latest commit. Thanks.

> ![Google Cloud - Doubtfire](https://github.com/thoth-tech/documentation/tree/main/docs/OnTrack/Deployment/Google%20Cloud/assets/GoogleCloud_Doubtfire.jpg "Google Cloud - Doubtfire")

Reviewer: **issue:** This file is not in this PR? Could we use the relative path instead?

Author: Fixed in my latest commit. Thanks.

Reviewer: Is this change missed on the latest commit?

Author: Sorry, sorted now. Thanks again!

via HTTPS (port 443).

We have used the source code from the Thoth Tech repository for the deployment into GCP, where we
used docker compose to deploy the images for the components required to run Doubtfire (api server,
app server, doubtfire-web, mariadb, nginx).

## Initial stages

Initially, the Google Cloud team had spent time understanding GCP, Docker, and the Doubtfire
deployment.

### Tests via localhost

Prior to deploying to GCP, we ran several tests locally (localhost) on our own workstations to
determine the configuration changes required deploy Doubtfire successfully. On our individual
workstations, we cloned the
[Doubtfire-deploy-GCP repository](https://github.com/thoth-tech/doubtfire-deploy-GCP) and modified
the necessary files. We then used docker compose and Docker to run and deploy containers.

> ![doubtfire-localhost-compose](https://github.com/thoth-tech/documentation/tree/main/docs/OnTrack/Deployment/Google%20Cloud/assets/doubtfire-localhost-compose.png "docker compose output")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![doubtfire-localhost-compose](assets/doubtfire-localhost-compose.png "docker compose output")
```

Author: Fixed in my latest commit. Thanks.

> Success! we have Docker containers running locally.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Success! We have Docker containers running locally.
```

Author: Fixed in my latest commit. Thanks.

> ![doubtfire-localhost-docker](https://github.com/thoth-tech/documentation/tree/main/docs/OnTrack/Deployment/Google%20Cloud/assets/doubtfire-localhost-docker.png "Docker containers running")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![doubtfire-localhost-docker](assets/doubtfire-localhost-docker.png "Docker containers running")
```

Success again! We have OnTrack being hosted locally and is accessible via https://localhost:443 .

> ![doubtfire-localhost](https://github.com/thoth-tech/documentation/tree/main/docs/OnTrack/Deployment/Google%20Cloud/assets/doubtfire-localhost.png "Doubtfire running on localhost")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![doubtfire-localhost](assets/doubtfire-localhost.png "Doubtfire running on localhost")
```

Author: Fixed in my latest commit. Thanks.

### Google Compute Engine instance

Once we determined the configuration changes required to be able to run locally (localhost), we then
needed to determine how to create and deploy a Compute Engine server instance in GCP that we could
use to deploy Doubtfire.

We started with a small, initial footprint and deployed a basic virtual machine (VM) instance with

> following details -

Reviewer: ```suggestion
following details:
```

Author: Fixed in my latest commit. Thanks.

- Name: instance-1
- Zone: australia-southeast2-a
- Machine type: e2-micro
- CPU platform: Intel Broadwell
- OS Image: Centos 7 (Image name centos-7-v20220406)
- Boot disk: 20GB SCSI (Balanced persistent disk, Google-managed encryption)
- Network interfaces: nic0 (with internal & external IP addresses)
- Firewalls: HTTP, HTTPS enabled
- GPUs/Display device: None, disabled

You can find the equivalent REST for our original instance from Google Compute Engine

> [here](https://github.com/thoth-tech/documentation/tree/main/docs/OnTrack/Deployment/Google%20Cloud/assets/gcp-instance-rest.json).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[here](assets/gcp-instance-rest.json).
```

> [here](https://github.com/thoth-tech/documentation/tree/main/docs/OnTrack/Deployment/Google%20Cloud/assets/gcp-instance-rest.json).

Reviewer: **question:** Do we have this file in the https://github.com/thoth-tech/doubtfire-deploy-GCP repo? 🤔

Author: I removed it for now as the lintliner kept throwing me an EOF error, even after adding an extra line to the end of the file and vaildating that the JSON syntax was correct. Not really important, it was just a nice to have.

Once we had the instance up and running, we connected to the instance using command-line shell via
SSH. In the Google Cloud console, you can view the options to connect by clicking the drop-down menu
beside _Connect SSH_ on the instance view.

> ![gcp-instance-connect](https://github.com/thoth-tech/documentation/tree/main/docs/OnTrack/Deployment/Google%20Cloud/assets/gcp-instance-connect.png "Instance connection options")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![gcp-instance-connect](assets/gcp-instance-connect.png "Instance connection options")
```

Alternatively, you can SSH to the instance via gcloud CLI -

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```shell
```

Author: Fixed in my latest commit. Thanks.

gcloud compute ssh --zone "australia-southeast2-a" "instance-1"  --project "sit-22t1-ontrack-deplo-d026375"
```

There were a few packages that needed to be installed on the host, such as -

- yum-utils
- yum-config-manager (required to setup docker-ce repo, see
  [Docker docs](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/centos/) for Centos)
- docker-ce, docker-ce-cli, containerd.io, docker-complose-plugin
- git
- openssl
- nano (optional)

> Once installed using _yum_, we had the minimum requirements to get started on the Doubtfire

Reviewer: **suggestion:** We [reserve](https://github.com/thoth-tech/handbook/blob/main/docs/processes/documentation/writing-style-guide.md#text-formatting) italic formatting for titles and legislations, or user input.

```suggestion
Once installed using `yum`, we had the minimum requirements to get started on the Doubtfire
```

deployment.

### Deploying OnTrack

From here, we pulled down the doubtfire-deploy repository, generated a new certificate and private
key for the host, and ran docker compose to deploy the containers for the OnTrack deployment.

> ![gcp-instance-docker](https://github.com/thoth-tech/documentation/tree/main/docs/OnTrack/Deployment/Google%20Cloud/assets/gcp-instance-docker.png "Instance running docker containers")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![gcp-instance-docker](assets/gcp-instance-docker.png "Instance running docker containers")
```

And we can browse to OnTrack over the internet using our public IP address via HTTPS (port 443).

> ![ontrack-login](https://github.com/thoth-tech/documentation/tree/main/docs/OnTrack/Deployment/Google%20Cloud/assets/ontrack-login.png "OnTrack Login")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![ontrack-login](assets/ontrack-login.png "OnTrack Login")
```

## Next stages

Since we have a functional and publicly accessible instance of Doubtfire running in GCP, the next
stages would be to focus on the Deployment team project objectives, such as -

- Create a CI/CD pipeline that automates the building, deployment, and validation of the Thoth Tech
  OnTrack deployment onto GCP.
- LDAP authentication for OnTrack.
- Email notifications configured with an SMTP server.
- Review security posture and instance sizing of the Thoth Tech OnTrack deployment in GCP.

Here's a high-level diagram of using CI/CD pipeline to automate the deployment of OnTrack onto GCP -

> ![Google Cloud - CI/CD](https://github.com/thoth-tech/documentation/tree/main/docs/OnTrack/Deployment/Google%20Cloud/assets/GoogleCloud_CICD.jpg "Google Cloud - CICD")

Reviewer: **issue (non-blocking):** Not part of this PR changeset. However, I have noted this link to be broken. Can you do a follow-up PR to fix it?
